Onboarding System (#844)
italia/eid-wallet-it-docs: docs/en/entity-onboarding.rst

For a high-level overview of the onboarding process, see :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Onboarding System`. In particular, the Section :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Onboarding Journey Maps` provides an onboarding journey map from the perspective of Entity's operators.

Overview
--------

Entity Onboarding System Architecture
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The IT-Wallet ecosystem is based on a federated trust infrastructure where participating entities MUST establish cryptographic trust relationships and maintain compliance with common security standards. 

The onboarding framework MUST allow technical registration procedures that are tailored to the participant's role in the IT-Wallet ecosystem:

  1. For Authentic Sources requiring data-focused registration procedures.

>   2. For operational Entities (Credential Issuers, Relying Parties, Wallet Providers) requiring cryptographic trust establishment through federation protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. For operational Entities (Credential Issuers, Relying Parties, Wallet Providers) requiring trust establishment.
```

Entity Types and Onboarding Pathways
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following table summarizes entity types, their roles, and corresponding onboarding pathways:

.. list-table:: Entity Types and Onboarding Pathways
   :class: longtable
   :widths: 20 30 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - **Entity Type**
     - **Primary Role**
     - **Onboarding Pathway**
     - **Key Requiring**
   * - Authentic Sources

>      - Authoritative data providers for credential attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Authoritative data providers for Credential attributes
```

     - Wallet Attestation from certified Wallet Provider.

Administrative vs Technical Registration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The onboarding process follows a structured multi-phase approach:

  1. **Administrative Registration**: All entities MUST complete initial administrative registration that validates their legal standing, regulatory compliance, and organizational eligibility to participate in the IT-Wallet ecosystem.

  2. **Technical Registration**: Following administrative approval, entities make technical registration through specialised pathways:
    
    - **Authentic Source Registration**: Data-focused registration procedures with API integration validation.
    - **Federation Registration**: Cryptographic trust establishment as defined in Section :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.

  3. **IT-Wallet Registry Integration**:

    - **Claims Registry Integration**: Authentic Sources select standardized claim definitions from Claims Registry during capability declaration.
    - **Taxonomy Integration**: All entities use Taxonomy hierarchical classification (domains, purposes) for organizational structure to categorize Credentials.

>     - **AS Registry Integration**: Authentic Sources registered with their declared claims and capabilities, enabling CI discovery and coordination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **AS Registry Integration**: Authentic Sources registered with their declared claims and capabilities, enabling Credential Issuers discovery and coordination.
```

>     - **Federation Registry Integration**: Operational entities included for trust validation during credential operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Federation Registry Integration**: Operational entities included for trust validation during Credential operations.
```

Authentic Sources undergo systematic registration to establish their role as authoritative data providers within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The registration process consists of requirements specification and procedural validation as described in :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Authentic Source Operator Journey`.

AS Registration Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Authentic Sources MUST comply with the following technical requirements to ensure ecosystem interoperability:

  - **Claims Compliance**:

    - **Claims Registry Adoption**: The Entities MUST use standardized Claims Registry identifiers in data responses without custom claim mapping.

  - **API Integration Standards**:

    - **Public Entities**: MUST integrate through PDND platform with e-service implementation following government standards.
    - **Private Entities**: MUST provide a complete OpenAPI 3.0 API Specification document that includes authorization framework, request/response schemas, error handling mechanisms, and sandbox environment for testing.

  - **Response Format Standardization**:

    - **Standard Claims Format**: The Entities MUST use Claims Registry identifiers and formats in all data responses.

>     - **State Mapping**: The Entities MUST handle clear mapping between their internal states and standard credential states (valid, suspended, revoked).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **State Mapping**: The Entities MUST handle clear mapping between their internal states and standard Credential states (valid, suspended, revoked).
```

  - **Security and Quality Assurance**:

>     - **Security Standards**: The Entities MUST implement TLS 1.3 minimum with proper authentication and security mechanisms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Security Standards**: The Entities MUST implement TLS 1.3 or higher with robust authentication mechanisms, forward secrecy, and cryptographic algorithms that meet current and emerging security standards, end-to-end confidentiality and integrity of all communications, maintaining compliance with evolving regulatory requirements and industry best practices.
```

>     - **User Authentication Evidence**: The Entities MAY request user authentication evidence from Credential Issuer before granting access to e-services for obtaining user attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **User Authentication Evidence**: The Entities MAY request User authentication evidence from Credential Issuer before granting access to e-services for obtaining User attributes.
```

     - **REQUIRED**. Available claims:

       - Array of claim identifiers from Claims Registry that the Authentic Source provides (e.g., ``["given_name", "family_name", "driving_privileges"]``).
       - Taxonomy classification for Authentic Source scope (e.g., ``[AUTHORIZATION]`` domains and ``["DRIVING_LICENSE"]`` purposes).
      
   * - **API Implementation Details**
     - **REQUIRED**. Integration information details:

       - Authorization framework for API access.
       - API definitions such as Request/Response Formats, including error management.
   * - **Data Provision Capabilities**
     - **REQUIRED**. Indicates if Authentic Source supports immediate/deferred data provision (boolean).    
   * - **User Information**
     - **OPTIONAL**. Markdown-formatted text containing human-readable information about data availability constraints or limitations. For example, if the AS database only contains data registered after a specific date, this information MUST be conveyed to users.

       **Example**: "Driving license data is available for licenses issued after January 1, 2020. For older licenses, contact the local motorization office.".
   * - **Display Properties**

>      - **OPTIONAL**. Visual branding suggestions for credentials using AS data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - **OPTIONAL**. Visual branding suggestions for Credentials using AS data:
```

       - Background color for Credentials in hexadecimal format (e.g., ``"#003d82"``).
       - Text color for Credentials in hexadecimal format (e.g., ``"#ffffff"``).

>        - Logo URI with cryptographic integrity verification for credential branding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       - Logo URI with cryptographic integrity verification for Credential branding.
```

**Step 1 - Registration Package Preparation**: The Entity prepares registration information according to the requirements table above. A non-normative example of information in JSON format is provided below. 

.. code-block:: json

   {

>      "as_id": "https://transport-authority.gov.example",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     "issuer": "https://transport-authority.gov.example",
     "role": "authentic source"
```

Reviewer: @fmarino-ipzs ^

Author: see commit 5cb7f2447a2d0223b6e4f7a78aa95a4c9b9ba2d7

  - **Taxonomy Validation**: Verification that declared domains, and purposes are valid taxonomy entries.
  - **API Integration Verification**:

    - **Public Entities**: PDND e-service specification compliance verification
    - **Private Entities**: OpenAPI 3.0 specification completeness including authorization framework, request/response schemas, error handling mechanisms, and sandbox environment.

  - **Response Format Standards**: Verification of Claims Registry format usage and state mapping specification.

**Step 3 - AS Registry Publication**: Upon successful validation:

  - Authentic Source Entity is published in AS Registry with complete declared capabilities.
  - Authentic Source becomes discoverable by Credential Issuers for integration requests.
  - Authentic Source is ready for operational data provision.

.. note::
   AS registration is complete and independent of CI integration. AS entities become discoverable immediately upon AS Registry publication, while credential availability to end-users depends on administrative AS-CI authorization followed by successful technical integration and Supervisory Body policy approval for catalog eligibility.

> AS-CI Integration Process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AS-CI Integration Process
```

Please, let's not use acronyms in the titles to improve the readability of the specs for the ppl

-------------------------

Following administrative AS-CI authorization obtained during the administrative registration phase, technical integration procedures establish the operational API connections and data access mechanisms between Credential Issuers and Authentic Sources.

Technical integration encompasses:

- **API Endpoint Configuration**: Establishment of secure API connections as specified in AS technical specifications (PDND e-services for public AS, OpenAPI 3.0 implementations for private AS).
- **Claims Mapping Validation**: Verification that CI implementation correctly maps AS data responses to standardized Claims Registry identifiers.
- **Data Flow Testing**: Validation of immediate/deferred data provision capabilities and error handling mechanisms.
- **Security Implementation**: Configuration of authentication, authorization, and audit logging as required by AS security standards.

Federation Entities Onboarding Process
---------------------------------------

> Federation Entities (Credential Issuers, Relying Parties, and Wallet Providers) MUST undergo onboarding procedures to establish cryptographic trust relationships within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The federation onboarding process establishes the distributed trust infrastructure through certificate issuance, trust chain configuration, and compliance attestation as detailed in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Federation Entities (Credential Issuers, Relying Parties, and Wallet Providers) MUST undergo onboarding procedures to establish trust relationships within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The federation onboarding process establishes the distributed trust infrastructure through certificate issuance, trust chain validations, and compliance attestation as detailed in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.
```

I remove crypto since trust is not only about crypto

Hierarchical Federation Authority Model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The IT-Wallet federation implements a **hierarchical onboarding model** where Federation Entities MAY be onboarded by either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IT-Wallet federation implements a **hierarchical onboarding model** where Federation Entities MUST be onboarded by one of the following actors:
```

  1. **Trust Anchor**: The root authority that has the capability to directly onboard any Federation Entity.
  2. **Intermediates**: Delegated authorities that onboard Leaf Entities on behalf of Trust Anchor.

This hierarchical approach enables **distributed onboarding management** while maintaining a unified trust establishment. Both Trust Anchors and Intermediates act as **Federation Authorities** with the following onboarding capabilities:

>   - **Certificate Issuance**: Issue X.509 certificates to their immediate subordinates with appropriate naming constraints as defined in :ref:`trust:X.509 PKI`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Certificate Issuance**: Issue X.509 Certificates to their Immediate Subordinates with appropriate naming constraints as defined in :ref:`trust:X.509 PKI`.
```

  - **Metadata Policy Application**: Apply federation-specific metadata policies with **cascading effect** (Trust Anchor policies override Intermediate policies).

>   - **Trust Mark Issuance**: Issue Federation Trust Marks attesting subordinate compliance with federation requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Trust Mark Issuance**: Issue Federation Trust Marks attesting Subordinate compliance with federation requirements.
```

Therefore, Federation Entities MAY be onboarded through different paths:

  - **Direct Trust Anchor Onboarding**: Entity directly registers with the Trust Anchor.
  - **Intermediate-mediated Onboarding**: Entity registers with an appropriate Intermediate.

Federation Onboarding Prerequisites
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Federation Entities MUST comply with the following technical requirements before initiating the onboarding process:

  - **Key Generation**: The entities MUST generate at least two key pairs using elliptic curve cryptography as specified in :ref:`algorithms:Cryptographic Algorithms`:

    - **Federation Key Pair**: Used for signing Entity Configurations and attesting Protocol Keys.

>     - **Protocol Key Pair(s)**: Used for entity-specific protocol operations (credential issuance, presentation verification, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Protocol Key Pair(s)**: Used for entity-specific protocol operations, such as Credential issuance, presentation verification, others.
```

>   - **Protocol Key Attestation**: The entities MUST create self-signed X.509 certificates for their Protocol Keys using the Federation Private Key. These certificates establish the authority relationship between Federation and Protocol keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Protocol Key Attestation**: The entities MUST create self-signed X.509 Certificates for their Protocol Keys using the Federation Private Key. These Certificates establish the authority relationship between Federation and Protocol keys.
```

  - **Entity Configuration Preparation**: The entities MUST publish an Entity Configuration (EC) signed with their Federation Private Key at the ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint as defined in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`. The EC MUST include:

    - A ``jwks`` claim containing the Federation Entity Public Key in JSON Web Key (JWK) format.
    - An ``iss`` claim with the Federation Entity Identifier as defined in :ref:`trust:Federation Roles`.
    - A ``sub`` claim equal to the ``iss`` claim.
    - ``iat`` and ``exp`` claims defining a valid time interval.
    - A ``metadata`` claim containing entity-specific metadata organized by Metadata Types (see :ref:`credential-issuer-entity-configuration:Credential Issuer Entity Configuration`, :ref:`relying-party-entity-configuration:Relying Party Entity Configuration`, or :ref:`wallet-provider-entity-configuration:Wallet Provider Entity Configuration`) with Protocol Keys included in the metadata ``jwks`` fields and self-signed certificates in the corresponding ``x5c`` claims.

>   - **Certificate Signing Request (CSR)**: The entities MUST prepare a CSR in PKCS #10 format containing **only the Federation Entity Public Key** for X.509 certificate issuance by the Federation Authority as defined in :ref:`trust:Trust Infrastructure Requirements`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Certificate Signing Request (CSR)**: The entities MUST prepare a CSR in PKCS #10 format containing **only the Federation Entity Public Key** for X.509 Certificate issuance by the Federation Authority as defined in :ref:`trust:Trust Infrastructure Requirements`.
```

Federation Onboarding Procedure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The federation onboarding follows a structured 4-step procedure that enables secure interactions among federation participants, **regardless of whether onboarding is performed by the Trust Anchor or an Intermediate**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The federation onboarding follows a structured 4-step procedure, it can be performed by the Trust Anchor or an Intermediate**.
```

.. note::
   The following procedure applies to Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers and Relying Parties that wish to perform onboarding in the IT-Wallet federation. The **Federation Authority** is referred to Trust Anchor or Intermediate according to organizational characteristics and federation governance policies.

.. note::

>    This section covers only the technical registration requirements. All administrative information (legal entity validation, regulatory compliance, organizational eligibility, etc.) is assumed to have been collected and validated by the Supervisory Body during the administrative registration phase, which is out of scope for this technical specification. Examples of administrative information include: legal entity name, business registration numbers, contact persons, legal compliance documentation, and operational authorizations.

Reviewer: @vcarollo `Supervisory Body during the administrative registration phase`

do you think that it is correct to use Supervisory Body in this phase?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I consider it correct, since it is now essentially defined.

**Step 1 - Onboarding Request Submission**: Federation Entity initiates the onboarding process by submitting a technical registration request including the following information.

.. list-table:: Federation Onboarding Technical Request Information
   :class: longtable
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - **Technical Information Category**
     - **Requirements and Description**
   * - **Federation Entity Identifier**
     - **REQUIRED**. A unique URL that identifies the Federation Entity as defined in :ref:`trust:Federation Roles`.
   * - **Federation Entity Public Key (JWK)**
     - **REQUIRED**. Elliptic public key in JSON Web Key format used for signing Entity Configurations and attesting Protocol Keys, using cryptographic algorithms specified in :ref:`algorithms:Cryptographic Algorithms`.
   * - **Certificate Signing Request (CSR)**

>      - **REQUIRED**. CSR in PKCS #10 format for X.509 certificate issuance by the Federation Authority. The CSR MUST:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - **REQUIRED**. CSR in PKCS #10 format for X.509 Certificate issuance by the Federation Authority. The CSR MUST:
```

>        - Contain **only the Federation Entity Public Key** to be certified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       - Contain **only the Federation Entity Public Keys**.
```

       - Be signed with the corresponding Federation Private Key.
       - Define the certificate Subject with required attributes as specified in :ref:`trust:X.509 Certificates Issuance` for Federation Entities.

.. warning::
   Before submitting the technical onboarding request, Federation Entities MUST ensure that their ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint publishes a valid Entity Configuration (as defined in :ref:`trust:Entity Configuration`) signed with their Federation Private Key corresponding to the Federation Entity Public Key provided in the request. The Entity Configuration MUST already include Protocol Keys in the metadata with self-signed X.509 certificates in the ``x5c`` claims.

A non-normative example of the technical information structure that Federation Entities submit during Step 1 onboarding request:

> .. code-block:: json

Reviewer: please move to a separate file, we'll include it in both the english and the italian version

  {

>     "entity_id": "https://credentials.example.gov",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "entity_id": "https://credential-issuer.example.gov",
```

    "entity_type": "credential_issuer",

>     "jwks": {

Reviewer: this should be an array, compliant with the data scheme traditionally used by `jwks`, as defined in IANA

Author: done

    "submission_timestamp": "2025-09-25T14:30:00Z"
  }

The following shows the decoded content of the CSR example above for reference:

.. code-block:: text

   Certificate Request:
       Data:
           Version: 0 (0x0)
           Subject: CN=credentials.example.gov, OU=Digital Credentials, O=Example Organization, L=Roma, ST=Lazio, C=IT, emailAddress=technical@credentials.example.gov
           Subject Public Key Info:
               Public Key Algorithm: id-ecPublicKey
                   Public-Key: (256 bit)
                   ASN1 OID: prime256v1
                   NIST CURVE: P-256
       Signature Algorithm: ecdsa-with-SHA256

.. note::
   The CSR Subject attributes MUST comply with the requirements specified in :ref:`trust:X.509 Certificates Issuance` for Federation Entities.

.. note::

>    The Federation Entity Public Key in the ``jwks`` field and the public key contained in the ``certificate_signing_request`` MUST be the same key. The key is provided in two formats: JWK format for OpenID Federation operations and PKCS #10 CSR format for X.509 certificate issuance by the Federation Authority. Protocol Keys are included only in the Entity Configuration metadata, and they MUST NOT be included in the onboarding request.

Reviewer: please make the request able to handle multiple keys in a single shot, jwks must be an array and the csrS too

Author: This was done here https://github.com/italia/eid-wallet-it-docs/pull/844/files#r2402505882

.. note::
   The Entity Configuration Endpoint is constructed automatically by appending ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` to the Federation Entity Identifier (``entity_id``). Federation Entities do not need to specify this endpoint separately in the registration request.

**Step 2 - Federation Authority Validation and Certificate Issuance**: Following the onboarding request submission, the **Federation Authority** MUST perform:

  - Verification of information provided in the registration request.

>   - Validation of the Entity Configuration published at the entity's ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint and its contained metadata (as defined in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Validation of the Entity Configuration, and the metadata contained in it, published at the entity's ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint (as defined in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`).
```

  - **Metadata Policy Application**: Application of federation-specific metadata policies to the entity's metadata based on organizational characteristics and authorization scope as defined in :ref:`trust:Subordinate Statements`. When onboarded through an Intermediate, both Intermediate and Trust Anchor policies apply, with Trust Anchor policies taking precedence in case of conflicts.

>   - **Certificate Issuance**: Certification of the Federation Entity Public Key with X.509 certificate issuance using the trust infrastructure detailed in :ref:`trust:Trust Infrastructure Requirements`. Intermediates issue certificates with appropriate **naming constraints** to scope certificate usage to their subordinates only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Certificate Issuance**: Certification of the Federation Entity Public Key with X.509 Certificate issuance using the trust infrastructure detailed in :ref:`trust:Trust Infrastructure Requirements`. Intermediates issue Certificates with appropriate **naming constraints** to scope Certificate usage to their subordinates only.
```

> Upon successful validation, the entity receives a response containing a certificate chain where:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon successful validation, the entity receives a response containing an X.509 Certificate Chain where:
```

  - The first element is the X.509 certificate that certifies the Federation Entity Public Key (issued by the Federation Authority).
  - **For Trust Anchor onboarding**: The second element is the Trust Anchor's self-signed X.509 certificate for validating the first certificate.
  - **For Intermediate onboarding**: Additional elements include the Intermediate's certificate and the Trust Anchor's self-signed certificate, forming a complete certificate chain.
  - All certificates are expressed in DER format encoded in Base64.

> Example certificate chain response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The first element is the X.509 Certificate that certifies the Federation Entity Public Key (issued by the Federation Authority).
  - **For Trust Anchor onboarding**: The second element is the Trust Anchor's self-signed X.509 Certificate for validating the first X.509 Certificate.
  - **For Intermediate onboarding**: Additional elements include the Intermediate's X.509 Certificate and the Trust Anchor's self-signed Certificate, forming a complete X.509 Certificate chain.
  - All X.509 Certificates are expressed in DER format encoded in Base64.

Example X.509 Certificate chain response:
```

.. code-block:: json

   [
     "MIIDqjCCA1GgAwIBAgIGAZc6/V9qMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw...",
     "MIIDQzCCAuigAwIBAgIGAZc6+XlDMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw..."
   ]

.. note::

>    If validation fails, the entity receives a response with identified issues that must be resolved before submitting a new onboarding request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If validation fails, the entity receives a response with identified issues to be resolved before submitting a new onboarding request.
```

> **Step 3 - Entity Configuration Update and Resolve Request**: After receiving the certificate chain from the Federation Authority, the entity MUST:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 3 - Entity Configuration Update and Resolve Request**: After receiving the X.509 Certificate chain from the Federation Authority, the entity MUST:
```

  1. **Update Entity Configuration**:

    - Add an ``authority_hints`` claim with a JSON Array containing the **immediate Federation Authority's** Federation Entity Identifier (Trust Anchor for direct onboarding, or Intermediate for mediated onboarding) as defined in :ref:`trust:Federation Roles`.

>     - Update the Federation Entity Public Key in the ``jwks`` claim by adding an ``x5c`` claim with the complete certificate chain received from the Federation Authority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Update the Federation Entity Public Key in the ``jwks`` claim by adding an ``x5c`` claim with the complete X.509 Certificate chain received from the Federation Authority.
```

>     - Update the Protocol Keys in the metadata ``jwks`` claims by extending their existing ``x5c`` claims to include the Federation certificate chain, creating complete trust chains from Protocol Keys to the Root Authority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Update the Protocol Keys in the metadata ``jwks`` claims by extending their existing ``x5c`` claims to include the X.509 Certificate chain, creating a complete Trust Chain from Protocol Keys to the Root Authority.
```

          "x5c": [
            "MIIDprotocolCert...",  // Protocol cert (signed by Federation key)
            "MIIDqjCCA1GgAwIBAgIGAZc6/V9qMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw...",  // Federation cert
            "MIIDQzCCAuigAwIBAgIGAZc6+XlDMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw..."   // Root cert
          ]
        }

  2. **Publish Updated Entity Configuration**: Publish the updated EC at the ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint as specified in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.

  3. **Submit Resolve Request**: Call the **Trust Anchor**'s ``/resolve`` endpoint (as defined in :ref:`trust:Trust Infrastructure Requirements`) with URL-encoded parameters:

    - ``sub``: Federation Entity Identifier.
    - ``trust_anchor``: **Trust Anchor** Federation Entity Identifier (always the root Trust Anchor, even for Intermediate-mediated onboarding).

    Example resolve request:

    .. code-block:: http

        GET /resolve?sub=https%3A%2F%2Fcredentials.example.gov&trust_anchor=https%3A%2F%2Ftrust-anchor.example.gov HTTP/1.1
        Host: trust-anchor.example.gov

**Step 4: Resolve Response and Onboarding Completion**

Following the resolve request, the **Federation Authority** performs:

>   - **Trust Chain Reconstruction**: Reconstruction of a valid trust chain for the entity as defined in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Trust Chain Reconstruction**: Reconstruction of a valid Trust Chain for the entity as defined in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.
```

  - **Federation Trust Mark Generation**: Generation of an IT-Wallet Federation Trust Mark as a signed JWT attestation of the entity's federation membership and compliance with IT-Wallet technical requirements.
  - **Trust Mark Integration in Subordinate Statement**: The generated Trust Mark is included in the entity's Subordinate Statement as defined in :ref:`trust:Subordinate Statements`.

>   - **Metadata Policy Application**: Application of cascading metadata policies during trust chain construction, ensuring Trust Anchor policies take precedence over Intermediate policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Metadata Policy Application**: Application of cascading metadata policies during Trust Chain construction, where Trust Anchor policies take precedence over Intermediate policies.
```

>   - Generation of a signed JSON Web Token (JWT) using algorithms specified in :ref:`algorithms:Cryptographic Algorithms` containing the reconstructed trust chain and validated entity metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Generation of a signed JSON Web Token (JWT) using algorithms specified in :ref:`algorithms:Cryptographic Algorithms` containing the reconstructed Trust Chain and validated entity metadata.
```

  - Transmission of an HTTP response containing the created JWT (Resolve Response).

> If the response status code is 200 OK, the Federation Entity MUST complete the onboarding process by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the response status code is ``200 OK``, the Federation Entity MUST complete the onboarding process by:
```

>   - **Validate Resolve Response**: Validate the JWT contained in the Resolve Response and extract the trust chain and validated metadata from the JWT payload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Validate Resolve Response**: Validate the JWT contained in the Resolve Response and extract the Trust Chain and validated metadata from the JWT payload.
```

  - **Fetch Subordinate Statement**: Retrieve its own Subordinate Statement from the immediate Federation Authority using the ``/fetch`` endpoint as defined in :ref:`trust:Federation API endpoints`.
  - **Extract Trust Mark**: Extract the Federation Trust Mark from the Subordinate Statement ``trust_marks`` claim.
  - **Trust Mark Integration**: Include the extracted Trust Mark in its Entity Configuration using the ``trust_marks`` claim as specified in :ref:`trust:Entity Configuration Leaves and Intermediates`.
  - **Final Entity Configuration Update**: Publish the updated Entity Configuration with the integrated Trust Mark at the ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint.

Upon successful completion of Step 4, the **entity onboarding is successfully completed**. The entity is now operational within the IT-Wallet federation and ready for operational activities.

.. note::

>    If the ``/resolve`` endpoint responds with status code 400 or 404, the entity must resolve the issues described in the response message before calling the resolve endpoint again. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If the ``/resolve`` endpoint responds with status code set to ``400`` or ``404``, the entity MUST resolve the issues described in the response message, before calling the resolve endpoint again. 
```

IT-Wallet Federation Trust Mark
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Federation Entities receive IT-Wallet Federation Trust Marks during successful onboarding completion. **Trust Marks are issued by the Federation Authority** (Trust Anchor for direct onboarding, Intermediate for mediated onboarding) and serve as verifiable attestations of federation membership, compliance with IT-Wallet technical requirements, and authorization policies for specific operational scopes.

Trust Mark Types and Schema
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Entities MAY receive multiple Trust Marks for different purposes and entity types, enabling granular authorization policy enforcement. Trust Mark identifiers MUST follow a hierarchical schema that reflects the authorization scope:

``https://<federation_authority_domain>/trust_marks/<purpose>/<entity_type>``

Where:

>   - ``<federation_authority_domain>``: The domain of the issuing Federation Authority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - ``<federation_authority_domain>``: The domain of the issuing Federation Authority.
```

it could be a trust anchor or an intermediate, while the trust mark type is about the trust framework or the entire ecosystem

@fmarino-ipzs we need to specialize these trust marks types, such as `https://wallet.gov.it`

The Trust Mark JWT (contained in the ``trust_mark`` claim above) includes the following claims:

.. list-table:: Trust Mark JWT Claims
   :class: longtable
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80

   * - **Claim**
     - **Description**
   * - **iss**
     - **REQUIRED**. Federation Authority issuing the Trust Mark (immediate superior: Trust Anchor or Intermediate).
   * - **sub**
     - **REQUIRED**. Federation Entity Identifier of the recipient.
   * - **id**
     - **REQUIRED**. Unique Trust Mark identifier, MUST match the ``trust_mark_type`` claim.
   * - **iat**
     - **REQUIRED**. Trust Mark issuance timestamp.
   * - **exp**
     - **REQUIRED**. Trust Mark expiration timestamp.
   * - **organization_type**
     - **REQUIRED**. Entity organization type (``public`` or ``private``).
   * - **id_code**
     - **RECOMMENDED**. JSON object with identification codes (e.g., IPA code for public entities, VAT number).
   * - **organization_name**
     - **RECOMMENDED**. Full name of the Organizational Entity.
   * - **email**
     - **RECOMMENDED**. Institutional or PEC email of the organization.
   * - **logo_uri**

>      - **OPTIONAL**. URL pointing to the Trust Mark logo for UI/UX purposes.

Reviewer: @RosaliaGaleano is there ssomethign to say about Trust Mark visuals?

Reviewer 3: We suggest inserting the redirect to Brand identity section - Trust Mark (must be updated with brand specifications as soon as we have them)
We suggest also to be Required instead of Recommended
cc: @steps88 @ChiaLeon

Reviewer: moved to a separate issue

   * - **ref**
     - **OPTIONAL**. URL with additional web information about the Trust Mark.

The following non-normative examples illustrate different Trust Mark JWT contents for federation membership and different authorization policies:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "iss": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it",
     "sub": "https://ci.public-authority.gov.example",

>      "id": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/trust_marks/federation-entity/credential-issuer",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     "trust_mark_type": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/trust_marks/federation-entity/credential-issuer",
```

     "iat": 1718207217,
     "exp": 1749743216,
     "organization_type": "public",

>      "id_code": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     "subject_id_codes": {
```

or `sub_id_codes`

I would not use nested objects, I'd prefer `ipa_code and or `legal_identifier`, if any, within the jwt top level

       "ipa_code": "pub_001",
       "legal_identifier": "12345678901"
     },
     "organization_name": "Public Authority Services",
     "email": "registry@public-authority.gov.example"
   }

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "iss": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it",
     "sub": "https://rental.cars.example.com",

>      "id": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/trust_marks/authorization_policy/relying-party",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     "trust_mark_type": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/trust_marks/authorization_policy/relying-party",
```

     "iat": 1718207217,
     "exp": 1749743216,
     "organization_type": "private",
     "id_code": {
       "vat_number": "IT12345678901",
       "legal_identifier": "12345678901"
     },
     "organization_name": "Premium Car Rental Services Ltd",
     "email": "compliance@rental.cars.example.com",
     "authorized_claims": ["given_name", "family_name", "driving_privileges"],
     "authorized_credential_types": ["mobile-driving-license"],
     "scope_restrictions": {
       "domains": ["AUTHORIZATION"],
       "purposes": ["DRIVING_LICENSE"]
     }
   }

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "iss": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it",
     "sub": "https://private-badge.ci.example.com",

>      "id": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/trust_marks/authorization_policy/credential-issuer",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     "trust_mark_type": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/trust_marks/authorization_policy/credential-issuer",
```

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "iss": "https://credentials.example.gov",
     "sub": "https://credentials.example.gov",
     "jwks": { },
     "authority_hints": ["https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it"],
     "trust_marks": [
       {
         "trust_mark_type": "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/trust_marks/federation-entity/credential-issuer",
         "trust_mark": "eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IlRydXN0QW5jaG9yS2V5SWQiLCJ0eXAiOiJKV1QifQ..."
       }
     ],
     "metadata": { }
   }

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "iss": "https://healthcare-ci.example.gov",
     "sub": "https://healthcare-ci.example.gov",
     "jwks": { },
     "authority_hints": ["https://healthcare.intermediate.eid-wallet.example.it"],
     "trust_marks": [
       {
         "trust_mark_type": "https://healthcare.intermediate.eid-wallet.example.it/trust_marks/federation-entity/credential-issuer",
         "trust_mark": "eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IkhlYWx0aGNhcmVJbnRlcm1lZGlhdGVLZXlJZCIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9..."
       }
     ],
     "metadata": { }
   }

Trust Mark Validation
"""""""""""""""""""""

Federation participants validate Trust Mark status through two mechanisms:

> 1. **Static Validation**: Cryptographic verification using the issuing Federation Authority's public key from the trust chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Static Validation**: Cryptographic verification using the issuing Federation Authority's public key from the Trust Chain.
```

2. **Dynamic Validation**: Real-time status verification via the issuing Federation Authority's ``/trust_mark_status`` endpoint as defined in :ref:`trust:Federation API endpoints`.

Certificate Management Operations
----------------------------------

> This section defines the operational procedures for X.509 certificate management within the IT-Wallet federation, covering certificate chain analysis, validation procedures, and revocation verification. These procedures complement the federation onboarding processes and support ongoing certificate lifecycle management for all federation participants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section defines the operational procedures for X.509 Certificate management within the IT-Wallet federation, covering certificate chain analysis, validation procedures, and revocation verification. These procedures complement the federation onboarding processes and support ongoing X.509 Certificate lifecycle management for all the participants.
```

Federation PKI Architecture
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The IT-Wallet federation operates a hierarchical Public Key Infrastructure where:

> 	- **Trust Anchor**: Acts as Root Certificate Authority where root certificates MUST NOT exceed **5-year validity period**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- **Trust Anchor**: Acts as Root Certificate Authority where root certificates MUST NOT exceed **5-year validity period**.
```

5 probably is too much

Author: This is the root CA. When you say that it is "too much", are you basing it on some known standard or authorative reference? As far as I know, a root CA is typically valid for 10-20 years. we should have a kind of hierarchy in the validity period (root CA, subCAs, leaves certificates).

	- **Federation Entity Certificate**: Each federation participant receives a certificate that operates as a limited sub-CA where certificates MUST NOT exceed **2-year validity period**.
	- **Protocol Certificates**: Self-issued certificates for internal services where certificates SHOULD NOT exceed **1-year validity period**.

Each federation entity MUST expose its Federation Entity certificate on a publicly accessible endpoint. The Federation Entity private key serves dual purposes:

> 	1. Self-issuing Protocol certificates for internal cryptographic operations (limited sub-CA capability).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	1. Self-issuing Protocol X.509 Certificates for internal cryptographic operations (limited sub-CA capability).
```

	2. Acting as the Federation Entity Key for signing Entity Statements.

.. note:: 

>   Federation entities (Leafs) can ONLY issue certificates for themselves (Protocol certificates), NOT for other federation entities. Only Federation Authorities (Trust Anchor and Intermediates) can issue certificates for other entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Federation entities (Leaves) can ONLY issue X.509 Certificates for themselves (Protocol certificates), NOT for other federation entities. Only Federation Authorities (Trust Anchor and Intermediates) can issue X.509 Certificates for other entities.
```

> For Protocol certificates with validity periods exceeding 24 hours, the issuing entity MUST publish and regularly update a Certificate Revocation List (CRL) on a publicly accessible endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For protocol specific X.509 Certificates, with validity periods exceeding 24 hours, the issuing entity MUST publish and regularly update a Certificate Revocation List (CRL) on a publicly accessible endpoint.
```

Certificate Chain Structure and Analysis
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Federation entities receive certificate chains during the onboarding process. Understanding and validating these chains is essential for proper federation operations and trust verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Federation entities receive X.509 Certificate chains during the onboarding process. Federation entities MUST validate these chains about themselves.
```

Certificate Chain Visualization
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Federation entities SHOULD analyze received certificate chains using standard cryptographic tools to verify proper structure and validate trust relationships.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The following script enables federation entities to:

	- Extract certificate details for verification.
	- Analyze certificate extensions and constraints.
	- Verify certificate hierarchy and relationships

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: please move into the folder utils/tools (we have) and give a href to the git file

   openssl x509 -inform der -in trust_anchor.der -out trust_anchor.pem

   # Validate Trust Anchor certificate (self-signed)
   echo "Validating Trust Anchor certificate..."
   openssl verify -CAfile trust_anchor.pem trust_anchor.pem

   # Validate Federation Entity certificate against Trust Anchor
   echo "Validating Federation Entity certificate..."
   openssl verify -CAfile trust_anchor.pem federation_entity.pem

   # Cleanup
   rm federation_entity.pem trust_anchor.pem

Federation entities SHOULD verify:

	1. **Certificate Signatures**: Each certificate MUST be properly signed by its issuer.
	2. **Certificate Chain Integrity**: Issuer-Subject relationships MUST be valid throughout the chain.
	3. **Certificate Validity Periods**: All certificates MUST be within their validity periods and MUST comply with federation limits.
	4. **Certificate Extensions**: Basic Constraints and Key Usage MUST comply with federation requirements:

		- Federation Entity certificates: ``CA:TRUE, pathlen:0`` (can only self-issue certificates).
		- Protocol certificates: ``CA:FALSE`` (cannot issue certificates).

Certificate Revocation Management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Federation entities MUST implement certificate revocation verification to ensure ongoing trust validation and compliance with federation security requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Federation entities MUST implement X.509 Certificate revocation verification to ensure ongoing trust validation and compliance with federation security requirements.
```

CRL Distribution and Access
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Federation authorities publish Certificate Revocation Lists (CRL) at publicly accessible endpoints. Federation entities MUST be able to access and process these CRL distributions for revocation verification.

The following procedure enables federation entities to:

	- Locate CRL distribution endpoints from certificates.
	- Download current revocation lists.
	- Analyze CRL content and validity periods.

.. code-block:: bash

>    #!/bin/bash

Reviewer: move this file to the tools directory

   echo "Certificate Serial Number: $normalized_serial"

   # Extract CRL URL and download
   crl_url=$(openssl x509 -in certificate.der -inform DER -text -noout | \
             grep "URI:" | sed 's/.*URI://')
   curl -s -O "$crl_url"
   crl_file=$(basename "$crl_url")

   # Validate CRL signature against Trust Anchor
   echo "Validating CRL signature..."
   openssl crl -in "$crl_file" -inform DER -noout -text -CAfile trust_anchor.pem

   # Extract revoked serial numbers from CRL
   revoked_serials=$(openssl crl -in "$crl_file" -inform DER -text -noout | \
                    grep 'Serial Number' | \
                    sed 's/.*Serial Number: //' | \
                    sed 's/^0*//' | \
                    tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]')

   # Check if certificate is revoked
   if echo "$revoked_serials" | grep -q "$normalized_serial"; then
       echo "Certificate Status: REVOKED"
       exit 1
   else
       echo "Certificate Status: VALID"
       exit 0
   fi

Certificate Management Best Practices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Certificate Validation Integration
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Federation entities SHOULD integrate certificate validation procedures into their standard federation operations:
> 
> 	1. **Entity Configuration Updates**: Verify certificate chains when processing authority hints and certificate updates.
> 	2. **Trust Chain Construction**: Validate all certificates during trust chain building procedures.
> 	3. **Federation API Operations**: Perform certificate revocation checks during ``/resolve`` and ``/fetch`` operations.
> 	4. **Protocol Certificate Management**: Validate self-issued Protocol certificates for internal services.
> 	5. **Periodic Validation**: Implement regular certificate and CRL validation schedules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Federation entities SHOULD integrate X.509 Certificate validation procedures into their standard federation operations:

	1. **Entity Configuration Updates**: Verify X.509 Certificate chains when processing authority hints and certificate updates.
	2. **Trust Chain Construction**: Validate all X.509 Certificates during trust chain building procedures.
	3. **Federation API Operations**: Perform X.509 Certificate revocation checks during ``/resolve`` and ``/fetch`` operations.
	4. **Protocol Certificate Management**: Validate self-issued protocol specific X.509 Certificate for internal services.
	5. **Periodic Validation**: Implement regular X.509 Certificate and CRL validation schedules.
```

Diagnostic and Troubleshooting
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Federation entities MAY implement diagnostic procedures to identify and resolve certificate-related issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Federation entities MUST implement diagnostic procedures to identify and resolve X.509 Certificate-related issues:
```

Reviewer: these are not optional but required for security reason.

@fmarino-ipzs ^

  - **Certificate Validation**, including:

    - **Authority Key Identifier Mismatches**: CRL Authority Key Identifier does not match Trust Anchor Subject Key Identifier.

>     - **Trust Anchor Certificate Rotation**: Outdated Trust Anchor certificates causing validation failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Trust Anchor Certificate Rotation**: Outdated Trust Anchor X.509 Certificate causing validation failures.
```

    - **Serial Number Format Issues**: Serial number normalization problems in revocation checking.

  - **CRL Validation Failure**: When CRL validation fails, federation entities SHOULD:

    1. **Verify Trust Anchor Certificate**: Ensure current Trust Anchor certificate is being used.
    2. **Check Authority Key Identifier**: Compare CRL Authority Key Identifier with Trust Anchor Subject Key Identifier.
    3. **Validate CRL Signature**: Verify CRL is properly signed by expected issuing authority.
    4. **Update Trust Anchor Certificate**: Download updated Trust Anchor certificate if rotation has occurred.

  - **Endpoint Accessibility Verification**: Federation entities SHOULD implement connectivity testing for certificate infrastructure endpoints.

The following non-normative example provides a script for Federation certificate infrastructure connectivity test:

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: move into a file withi nthe utils/tools folder of this project and give an href to reference it

   ta_cert_url="https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/pki/ta.cer"
   if curl -f -s "$ta_cert_url" > /dev/null; then
       echo "Trust Anchor certificate endpoint: ACCESSIBLE"
   else
       echo "Trust Anchor certificate endpoint: FAILED"
   fi

   # Test CRL distribution endpoints
   ta_crl_url="https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/pki/ta.crl"
   if curl -f -s "$ta_crl_url" > /dev/null; then
       echo "Trust Anchor CRL endpoint: ACCESSIBLE"
   else
       echo "Trust Anchor CRL endpoint: FAILED"
   fi

Certificate Lifecycle Coordination
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Federation entities MUST coordinate certificate management with federation lifecycle procedures following the established validity periods:

- **Certificate Renewal**: Align certificate renewals with Entity Configuration updates and Trust Mark refresh cycles, according to the federation limits defined in :ref:`entity-onboarding:Federation PKI Architecture`.
- **Key Rotation**: Coordinate Federation Entity Key rotation with certificate renewal procedures.
- **CRL Management**: For Protocol certificates with validity > 24 hours, maintain current CRL publication.

> - **Federation Exit**: Ensure proper certificate revocation during voluntary or supervisory body-initiated federation exit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Federation Exit**: Ensure proper X.509 Certificate revocation during voluntary or supervisory body-initiated federation exit.
```

  - **Key Rotation**

    1. **New Key Generation**: The Entity MUST generate a new Federation Entity Public Key pair.
    2. **Parallel Key Publication**: The Entity MUST publish both old and new keys in Entity Configuration ``jwks`` claim during transition period.
    3. **Certificate Request**: The Entity MUST request new certificate for new public key following standard procedure.
    4. **Gradual Migration**: The Entity MUST update Entity Configuration to use new key for signing while maintaining old key for verification.
    5. **Old Key Deprecation**: The Entity MUST remove old key from Entity Configuration after validation period.

  - **Metadata Updates**

    - **Endpoint Changes**: The Entity MAY update service endpoints in entity-specific metadata.
    - **Capability Updates**: The Entity MAY modify supported protocols, algorithms, or service capabilities within the constraints defined by this IT-Wallet implementation profile.

All technical updates MUST be validated through:

  1. **Entity Configuration Validation**: The Entity MUST verify updated EC structure and content.

>   2. **Trust Chain Resolution**: The Entity MUST confirm ``/resolve`` endpoint returns valid Trust Chain.

Reviewer: iot seems that wallet providers are not mandated to implement the resolve endpoint

@grausof am I correct?

Author: @peppelinux , I don't understand your comment. Here we are not saying that the Entoty MUST implement resolve endpoint. Can you explain your points?

  3. **Federation Status**: The Entity MUST verify entity operational status in federation registry.
  4. **Integration Testing**: The Entity SHOULD test federation protocol operations with updated configuration.

Technical Federation Exit Procedures
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> For business context on federation exit processes, see :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Federation Exit and Removal Processes`. This section covers technical implementazione procedurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For business context on federation exit processes, see :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Federation Exit and Removal Processes`. This section covers technical implementation procedures.
```

> For business context on federation exit processes, see :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Federation Exit and Removal Processes`. This section covers technical implementazione procedurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For business context on federation exit processes, see :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Federation Exit and Removal Processes`. This section covers technical implementation procedures.
```

Voluntary Exit - Technical Deactivation
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

>   1. **Certificate Revocation Request**: The Entity MUST submit a certificate revocation request to Federation Authority with revocation reason. The request MUST be signed with the Federation Entity Private Key corresponding to the certificate being revoked to prove the legitimacy of the revocation request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. **Certificate Revocation Request**: The Entity MUST submit am X.509 Certificate revocation request to Federation Authority with revocation reason. The request MUST be signed with the Federation Entity Private Key corresponding to the certificate being revoked to prove the legitimacy of the revocation request.
```

>   1. **Certificate Revocation Request**: The Entity MUST submit a certificate revocation request to Federation Authority with revocation reason. The request MUST be signed with the Federation Entity Private Key corresponding to the certificate being revoked to prove the legitimacy of the revocation request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. **Certificate Revocation Request**: The Entity MUST submit a X.509 Certificate revocation request to Federation Authority with revocation reason. The request MUST be signed with the Federation Entity Private Key corresponding to the X.509 Certificate being revoked to prove the legitimacy of the revocation request.
```

>   2. **CRL Update Verification**: The Federation Authority MUST revoke the Entity's certificates and the Entity MUST verify they appear in updated Certificate Revocation List.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. **CRL Update Verification**: The Federation Authority MUST revoke the Entity's X.509 Certificate and the Entity MUST verify they appear in updated Certificate Revocation List.
```

>   3. **Subordinate Statement Removal**: The Federation Authority MUST completely remove the Entity's Subordinate Statement from the Federation Registry to prevent any trust relationship validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3. **Subordinate Statement Removal**: The Federation Authority MUST completely remove the Entity's Subordinate Statement from the Federation Registry to prevent any trust relationship validation, and therefore remove any reference to that Entity in the listing endpoint, resolve endpoint or trust marked listing endpoint.
```

  4. **Entity Configuration Deactivation**: The Entity MUST deactivate its Entity Configuration. The Entity MAY either:

     a. Remove the Entity Configuration completely from the ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint (returning HTTP 404), OR

>      b. Keep the Entity Configuration available but MUST ensure it remains expired (with ``exp`` claim in the past) and MUST NOT update it with fresh timestamps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     b. Keep the Entity Configuration as expired (with ``exp`` claim in the past). It therefore MUST NOT update it with fresh timestamps.
```

>   5. **Registry Status Update**: The Entity SHOULD verify removal from Federation Registry, also verifying the Trust Mark status returns ``{"active": false}`` from ``/trust_mark_status`` endpoint. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  5. **Registry Status Update**: The Entity SHOULD verify removal from Federation Registry, also verifying the Trust Mark status using the Trust Mark Status endpoint. 
```

>   5. **Registry Status Update**: The Entity SHOULD verify removal from Federation Registry, also verifying the Trust Mark status returns ``{"active": false}`` from ``/trust_mark_status`` endpoint. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  5. **Registry Status Update**: The Entity SHOULD verify removal from Federation Registry, also verifying the Trust Mark status using the Trust Mark Status endpoint. 
```

> Non-normative example of certificate revocation request following RFC 3280 format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-normative example of X.509 Certificate revocation request following :rfc:`3280` format:
```

please use an href for RFC 3280

> Non-normative example of certificate revocation request following RFC 3280 format:

Reviewer: href for RFC 3280

.. code-block:: text

>    Certificate Revocation Request:

Reviewer: move to an example file

>    Certificate Revocation Request:

Reviewer: pls move to a separate example file

   Subject: CN=credentials.example.gov, OU=Digital Credentials, O=Example Organization, L=Roma, ST=Lazio, C=IT, emailAddress=technical@credentials.example.gov
   Certificate Serial Number: 987654321
   Revocation Reason: cessation_of_operation (5)
   Revocation Date: 2025-12-31T23:59:59Z

   Request signed with Federation Entity Private Key corresponding to:
   Public Key Algorithm: id-ecPublicKey
   ASN1 OID: prime256v1
   NIST CURVE: P-256
   Key ID: NsXymfIILEPR5Y0t

   Note: The CRR MUST be signed with the same private key that corresponds to the
   certificate being revoked to authenticate the revocation request.

Example CRR in DER format (Base64 encoded):

.. code-block:: text

>    -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE REVOCATION REQUEST-----

Reviewer: move to an example file

>    -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE REVOCATION REQUEST-----

Reviewer: pls move it to a separate example file

   MIIBVjCB/wIBADBpMQswCQYDVQQGEwJJVDEOMAwGA1UECAwFTGF6aW8xDTALBgNV
   BAcMBFJvbWExGjAYBgNVBAoMEUV4YW1wbGUgT3JnYW5pemF0aW9uMR8wHQYDVQQD
   DBZjcmVkZW50aWFscy5leGFtcGxlLmdvdjBZMBMGByqGSM49AgEGCCqGSM49AwEH
   A0IABIBgZ4HBgUCNXwY5LJSlKzm7gXY4FApFJCj91Gpb1K9GEIouTq2X3L0K64Iq
   0ob4l_gslT14644zbYXYF-xmw7aPdlbMuw3T1URwI4nafMtKrYwDQYJKoZIhvcNAQ
   kEAwIJrRLl1VR987654321gBgJKwYBBQUHAgEWHGh0dHBzOi8vZXhhbXBsZS5vcmcv
   cG9saWN5MAoGCCqGSM49BAMCA0gAMEUCIQC9h3Y6hFgd7zUzZyBrQ3jJ8HmVF2Qa
   -----END CERTIFICATE REVOCATION REQUEST-----

Supervisory Body Removal - Technical Implementation
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

>   1. **Emergency Certificate Revocation**: The Federation Authority MUST immediately revoke certificates with appropriate reason code (e.g., "Key Compromise", "Cessation of Operation").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. **Emergency Certificate Revocation**: The Federation Authority MUST immediately revoke X.509 Certificate with appropriate reason code (e.g., "Key Compromise", "Cessation of Operation").
```

>   1. **Emergency Certificate Revocation**: The Federation Authority MUST immediately revoke certificates with appropriate reason code (e.g., "Key Compromise", "Cessation of Operation").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. **Emergency Certificate Revocation**: The Federation Authority MUST immediately revoke X.509 Certificate with appropriate reason code (e.g., "Key Compromise", "Cessation of Operation").
```

  2. **CRL Emergency Update**: The Trust Anchor MUST publish updated CRL within emergency timeframe.

>   3. **Subordinate Statement Removal**: The Federation Authority MUST immediately and completely remove the Entity's Subordinate Statement from all federation endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3. **Subordinate Statement Removal**: The Federation Authority MUST immediately stop issuing the Entity's Subordinate Statements using the fetch endpoint, and or any reference to that Entity using the listing endpoint, or the trust marked listing endpoint, or the resolve endpoint.
```

>   3. **Subordinate Statement Removal**: The Federation Authority MUST immediately and completely remove the Entity's Subordinate Statement from all federation endpoints.

Reviewer: instead of duplicating the same informations and details in multiple part of the document, we could write these in an RST file and include it in each section

@fmarino-ipzs wdyt?

>   4. **Entity Configuration Invalidation**: The Entity's Configuration at ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` becomes invalid due to certificate revocation (signature verification fails).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  4. **Entity Configuration Invalidation**: The Entity's Configuration at ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` becomes invalid due to X.509 Certificate revocation (signature verification fails).
```

  5. **Trust Chain Invalidation**: Trust Chain resolution MUST return error status for affected entity.
  6. **Service Endpoint Isolation**: Federation infrastructure MUST block access to federation service endpoints.

Example emergency revocation verification:

.. code-block:: bash

>    # Check emergency CRL update

Reviewer: move to a script withi nthe utils/tool folder

   curl -o emergency.crl https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/pki/ta-sub.crl
   openssl crl -in emergency.crl -text -noout | grep "Last Update"
   
   # Verify Trust Chain resolution fails
   curl "https://trust-anchor.eid-wallet.example.it/resolve?sub=https%3A//suspended-entity.example.it&trust_anchor=https%3A//trust-registry.eid-wallet.example.it"

>    # Expected: HTTP 404 or specific error response

Reviewer: please move to the utils/tool folder of this project and use an href to it

**Component-Level Technical Modifications**

> Specific technical components MAY be modified while maintaining federation membership:

Reviewer: say somethign more about the example below, about the use case

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "iss": "https://ci.example.it",
     "sub": "https://ci.example.it",

>      "jwks": { },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     "jwks": { 
       // jwks content
     },
```

     "metadata": {
       "openid_credential_issuer": {
         "credential_endpoint": "https://ci.example.it/credential",
         "credentials_supported": [ ]
         // removed: "batch_credential_endpoint" for maintenance
       }
     }
   }

The Entity MUST follow these steps for component modifications:

1. **Entity Configuration Update**: The Entity MUST modify metadata to reflect component changes.
2. **Trust Chain Revalidation**: The Entity MUST verify updated configuration through ``/resolve`` endpoint.
3. **Service Testing**: The Entity SHOULD test remaining federation protocol operations.
4. **Registry Verification**: The Entity SHOULD confirm updated capabilities in federation registry.

**Post-Exit Technical Obligations**

Entities that exit the federation MUST maintain the following for regulatory compliance:

> 1. **Historical Entity Configuration**: The Entity MUST maintain ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint accessibility for audit purposes (minimum 7 years).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Historical Entity Configuration**: The Entity MUST maintain ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint accessibility for audit purposes.
```

I would give thresholds using legal requirements about retention policies.

> 2. **Certificate Chain Archive**: The Entity MUST keep certificate chains accessible for existing credential verification (minimum 7 years).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Certificate Chain Archive**: The Entity MUST keep X.509 Certificate chains accessible for existing Credential verification.
```

> 2. **Certificate Chain Archive**: The Entity MUST keep certificate chains accessible for existing credential verification (minimum 7 years).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Certificate Chain Archive**: The Entity MUST keep X.509 Certificate chains accessible for existing Credential verification (minimum 7 years).
```

.. list-table:: Federation Onboarding Technical Request Information
   :class: longtable
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - **Technical Information Category**
     - **Requirements and Description**
   * - **Federation Entity Identifier**
     - **REQUIRED**. A unique URL that identifies the Federation Entity as defined in :ref:`trust:Federation Roles`.
   * - **Federation Entity Public Key (JWK)**
     - **REQUIRED**. Elliptic public key in JSON Web Key format used for signing Entity Configurations and attesting application specific keys, using cryptographic algorithms specified in :ref:`algorithms:Cryptographic Algorithms`.
   * - **Certificate Signing Request (CSR)**
     - **REQUIRED**. CSR in PKCS #10 format for X.509 Certificate issuance by the Federation Authority. The CSR MUST:

       - Contain **only the Federation Entity Public Keys**.
       - Be signed with the corresponding Federation Private Key.
       - Define the certificate Subject with required attributes as specified in :ref:`trust:X.509 Certificates Issuance` for Federation Entities.

.. warning::

>    Before submitting the technical onboarding request, Federation Entities MUST ensure that their ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint publishes a valid Entity Configuration (as defined in :ref:`trust:Entity Configuration`) signed with their Federation Private Key corresponding to the Federation Entity Public Key provided in the request. The Entity Configuration MUST already include application specific keys in the metadata with self-signed X.509 certificates in the ``x5c`` claims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Before submitting the technical onboarding request, Federation Entities MUST ensure that their ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint publishes a valid Entity Configuration (as defined in :ref:`trust:Entity Configuration`) signed with their Federation Private Key corresponding to the Federation Entity Public Key provided in the request. The Entity Configuration MUST already include application specific keys in the metadata, using self-signed X.509 Certificates made available within the ``x5c`` claim.
```

A non-normative example of the technical information structure that Federation Entities submit during Step 1 onboarding request:

.. code-block:: json

  {
    "entity_id": "https://credential-issuer.example.gov",
    "entity_type": "credential_issuer",
    "jwks": {
      "keys": [
        {
          "kid": "NsXymfIILEPR5Y0t",
          "kty": "EC",
          "x": "gXY4FApFJCj91Gpb1K9GEIouTq2X3L0K64Iq0ob4l_g",
          "y": "l-6dcrIrFVdrzoY9cRJv9zNuFOR3MsDz6TSDhB0xEo4",
          "crv": "P-256"
        }
      ]
    },

>     "certificate_signing_request": "-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE REQUEST-----\nMIIBTTCB9QIBADCBkjELMAkGA1UEBhMCSVQxDjAMBgNVBAgMBUxhemlvMQ0wCwYD\nVQQHDARSb21hMRYwFAYDVQQKDA1QYWdvUEEgUy5wLkEuMSQwIgYDVQQDDBtmb28x\nMS5ibG9iLmNvcmUud2luZG93cy5uZXQxJjAkBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWF3BhZ29wYXNw\nYUBwZWMucGFnb3BhLml0MFkwEwYHKoZIzj0CAQYIKoZIzj0DAQcDQgAEgXY4FApF\nJCj91Gpb1K9GEIouTq2X3L0K64Iq0ob4l_g\n-----END CERTIFICATE REQUEST-----",

Reviewer: since we have multiple keys, we should support multiple CSRs

    "submission_timestamp": "2025-09-25T14:30:00Z"
  }

The following shows the decoded content of the CSR example above for reference:

.. code-block:: text

   Certificate Request:
       Data:
           Version: 0 (0x0)
           Subject: CN=credentials.example.gov, OU=Digital Credentials, O=Example Organization, L=Roma, ST=Lazio, C=IT, emailAddress=technical@credentials.example.gov
           Subject Public Key Info:
               Public Key Algorithm: id-ecPublicKey
                   Public-Key: (256 bit)
                   ASN1 OID: prime256v1
                   NIST CURVE: P-256
       Signature Algorithm: ecdsa-with-SHA256

.. note::
   The CSR Subject attributes MUST comply with the requirements specified in :ref:`trust:X.509 Certificates Issuance` for Federation Entities.

.. note::

>    The Federation Entity Public Key in the ``jwks`` field and the public key contained in the ``certificate_signing_request`` MUST be the same key. The key is provided in two formats: JWK format for OpenID Federation operations and PKCS #10 CSR format for X.509 certificate issuance by the Federation Authority. application specific keys are included only in the Entity Configuration metadata, and they MUST NOT be included in the onboarding request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The Federation Entity Public Key in the ``jwks`` field and the public key contained in the ``certificate_signing_request`` MUST be the same key. The key is provided in two formats: JWK format for OpenID Federation operations and PKCS #10 CSR format for X.509 Certificate issuance by the Federation Authority. Application specific keys are included only in the Entity Configuration metadata, and they MUST NOT be included in the onboarding request.
```

.. note::
   The Entity Configuration Endpoint is constructed automatically by appending ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` to the Federation Entity Identifier (``entity_id``). Federation Entities do not need to specify this endpoint separately in the registration request.

**Step 2 - Federation Authority Validation and Certificate Issuance**: Following the onboarding request submission, the **Federation Authority** MUST perform:

  - Verification of information provided in the registration request.
  - Validation of the Entity Configuration, and the metadata contained in it, published at the entity's ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint (as defined in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`).

>   - **Metadata Policy Application**: Application of federation-specific metadata policies to the entity's metadata based on organizational characteristics and authorization scope as defined in :ref:`trust:Subordinate Statements`. When onboarded through an Intermediate, both Intermediate and Trust Anchor policies apply, with Trust Anchor policies taking precedence in case of conflicts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Metadata Policy Application**: Application of federation-specific metadata policies to the entity's metadata based on organizational characteristics and authorization scopes as defined in :ref:`trust:Subordinate Statements`. When onboarded through an Intermediate, both Intermediate and Trust Anchor policies apply, with Trust Anchor policies taking precedence in case of conflicts.
```

>   - **Certificate Issuance**: Certification of the Federation Entity Public Key with X.509 Certificate issuance using the trust infrastructure detailed in :ref:`trust:Trust Infrastructure Requirements`. Intermediates issue Certificates with appropriate **naming constraints** to scope Certificate usage to their subordinates only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Certificate Issuance**: Certification of the Federation Entity Public Key with X.509 Certificate issuance using the trust infrastructure detailed in :ref:`trust:Trust Infrastructure Requirements`. Intermediates issue Certificates with appropriate **naming constraints** to scope Certificate usage to their Subordinates only.
```

> Upon successful validation, the entity receives a response containing an X.509 Certificate Chain where:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon successful validation, the entity receives a response containing an X.509 Certificate chain where:
```

>   - The first element is the X.509 Certificate that certifies the Federation Entity Public Key (issued by the Federation Authority).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The first element is the X.509 Certificate attesting the Federation Entity Public Key (issued by the Federation Authority).
```

    Example authority_hints addition:

    .. code-block:: json

        {
          "iat": 1718207217,
          "exp": 1749743216,
          "iss": "https://credentials.example.gov",
          "sub": "https://credentials.example.gov",
          "authority_hints": ["https://trust-anchor.example.gov"],
          //...
        }

    Example Federation JWK with certificate chain:

    .. code-block:: json

        {
          "kid": "NsXymfIILEPR5Y0t",
          "kty": "EC",
          "x": "gXY4FApFJCj91Gpb1K9GEIouTq2X3L0K64Iq0ob4l_g",
          "y": "l-6dcrIrFVdrzoY9cRJv9zNuFOR3MsDz6TSDhB0xEo4",
          "crv": "P-256",
          "x5c": [
            "MIIDqjCCA1GgAwIBAgIGAZc6/V9qMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw...",
            "MIIDQzCCAuigAwIBAgIGAZc6+XlDMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw..."
          ]
        }

    Example Protocol JWK with extended certificate chain:

    .. code-block:: json

        {
          "kid": "ProtocolKeyId123",
          "kty": "EC",
          "x": "protocol_key_x_coordinate...",
          "y": "protocol_key_y_coordinate...",
          "crv": "P-256",

>           "x5c": [
>             "MIIDprotocolCert...",  // Protocol cert (signed by Federation key)
>             "MIIDqjCCA1GgAwIBAgIGAZc6/V9qMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw...",  // Federation cert
>             "MIIDQzCCAuigAwIBAgIGAZc6+XlDMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw..."   // Root cert
>           ]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          "x5c": [
            "MIIDprotocolCert...",  // Protocol cert (signed by Federation key)
            "MIIDqjCCA1GgAwIBAgIGAZc6/V9qMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw...",  // Federation cert
            "MIIDQzCCAuigAwIBAgIGAZc6+XlDMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw..."   // Root cert
          ]
```

a note for the reviews to come: what about keeping this chain updated, if any of the intermediate or TA's key would change?

Overview
--------

Entity Onboarding System Architecture
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The IT-Wallet ecosystem is based on a federated trust infrastructure where participating entities MUST establish cryptographic trust relationships and maintain compliance with common security standards. 

The onboarding framework MUST allow technical registration procedures that are tailored to the participant's role in the IT-Wallet ecosystem:

  1. For Authentic Sources requiring data-focused registration procedures.
  2. For operational Entities (Credential Issuers, Relying Parties, Wallet Providers) requiring trust establishment.

Entity Types and Onboarding Pathways
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following table summarizes entity types, their roles, and corresponding onboarding pathways:

.. list-table:: Entity Types and Onboarding Pathways
   :class: longtable
   :widths: 20 30 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - **Entity Type**
     - **Primary Role**
     - **Onboarding Pathway**
     - **Key Requiring**
   * - Authentic Sources

>      - Authoritative data providers for Credential attributes

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - Authoritative data providers for Digital Credential attributes
```

     - :ref:`entity-onboarding:Authentic Sources Registration Process`
     - Data authority validation, API integration (PDND/Custom).
   * - Credential Issuers
     - Generate and issue Digital Credentials using Authentic Source's data
     - :ref:`entity-onboarding:Federation Entities Onboarding Process`
     - IT-Wallet Trust Infrastructure compliance, :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.
   * - Relying Parties
     - Verify Digital Credentials for service access
     - :ref:`entity-onboarding:Federation Entities Onboarding Process`
     - IT-Wallet Trust Infrastructure compliance, :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.
   * - Wallet Providers
     - Provide Wallet Solutions to citizens
     - :ref:`entity-onboarding:Federation Entities Onboarding Process`
     - IT-Wallet Trust Infrastructure compliance :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`, Wallet Attestation capabilities :ref:`wallet-instance-registration:Wallet Instance Initialization and Registration`.
   * - Wallet Instances

>      - User-level digital wallet applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - User-level digital Wallet applications
```

    - **Taxonomy Integration**: All entities use Taxonomy hierarchical classification (domains, purposes) for organizational structure to categorize Credentials.
    - **AS Registry Integration**: Authentic Sources registered with their declared claims and capabilities, enabling Credential Issuers discovery and coordination.
    - **Federation Registry Integration**: Operational entities included for trust validation during Credential operations.
    - **Catalog Integration**: Credential types published in :ref:`registry:Digital Credentials Catalog Structure` based on supervisory body policies for public discovery eligibility.

All registry components and their interactions are detailed in :ref:`registry:Registry Infrastructure`.

Authentic Sources Registration Process
--------------------------------------

Authentic Sources undergo systematic registration to establish their role as authoritative data providers within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The registration process consists of requirements specification and procedural validation as described in :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Authentic Source Operator Journey`.

AS Registration Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Authentic Sources MUST comply with the following technical requirements to ensure ecosystem interoperability:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authentic Sources MUST comply with the following technical requirements:
```

  - **Response Format Standardization**:

    - **Standard Claims Format**: The Entities MUST use Claims Registry identifiers and formats in all data responses.
    - **State Mapping**: The Entities MUST handle clear mapping between their internal states and standard Credential states (valid, suspended, revoked).

  - **Security and Quality Assurance**:

    - **Security Standards**: The Entities MUST implement TLS 1.3 or higher with robust authentication mechanisms, forward secrecy, and cryptographic algorithms that meet current and emerging security standards, end-to-end confidentiality and integrity of all communications, maintaining compliance with evolving regulatory requirements and industry best practices.
    - **User Authentication Evidence**: The Entities MAY request User authentication evidence from Credential Issuer before granting access to e-services for obtaining User attributes.
    - **Data Quality**: The Entities MUST specify update frequency and provide data freshness guarantees.
    - **Audit Trail**: The Entities MUST implement logging capabilities for all data access and provisioning activities.

> AS Registration Information Requirements
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authentic Sources Registration Information Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

During registration, Authentic Sources MUST provide the following information:

> 

Reviewer: .. note::
  Only Italian Authentic Sources can be onboarded at the current stage of IT-Wallet.

Reviewer: @fmarino-ipzs ^

Author: I suppose that you want to add this note. I'll do asap.

Author: done

.. list-table:: AS Registration Information Requirements
   :class: longtable
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Information Category
     - Description and Examples
   * - **Organization Information**
     - **REQUIRED**. Organization Details including:

       - Organization name, type ("public" or "private") and country (ISO 3166-1 alpha-2).
       - Administrative identifier codes such as IPA registration code (REQUIRED only for public Authentic Sources) and legal identifier (Fiscal Code/VAT Number).

>        - Contact Information including technical and administrative contact email addresses, homepage URI, privacy policy URI, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       - Contact Information including technical and administrative contacts, such as email addresses, homepage URI, privacy policy URI.
```

   * - **Data Capabilities Declaration**
     - **REQUIRED**. Available claims:

       - Array of claim identifiers from Claims Registry that the Authentic Source provides (e.g., ``["given_name", "family_name", "driving_privileges"]``).

>        - Taxonomy classification for Authentic Source scope (e.g., ``[AUTHORIZATION]`` domains and ``["DRIVING_LICENSE"]`` purposes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       - Taxonomy classification for Authentic Source scope (e.g., ``["AUTHORIZATION"]`` domains and ``["DRIVING_LICENSE"]`` purposes).
```

      
   * - **API Implementation Details**
     - **REQUIRED**. Integration information details:

       - Authorization framework for API access.
       - API definitions such as Request/Response Formats, including error management.
   * - **Data Provision Capabilities**
     - **REQUIRED**. Indicates if Authentic Source supports immediate/deferred data provision (boolean).    
   * - **User Information**
     - **OPTIONAL**. Markdown-formatted text containing human-readable information about data availability constraints or limitations. For example, if the AS database only contains data registered after a specific date, this information MUST be conveyed to users.

       **Example**: "Driving license data is available for licenses issued after January 1, 2020. For older licenses, contact the local motorization office.".
   * - **Display Properties**

>      - **OPTIONAL**. Visual branding suggestions for Credentials using AS data:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - **OPTIONAL**. Visual branding suggestions for Digital Credentials using AS data:
```

>        - Background color for Credentials in hexadecimal format (e.g., ``"#003d82"``).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
       - Background color for Digital Credentials in hexadecimal format (e.g., ``"#003d82"``).
```

>        - Text color for Credentials in hexadecimal format (e.g., ``"#ffffff"``).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
       - Text color for Digital Credentials in hexadecimal format (e.g., ``"#ffffff"``).
```

>        - Logo URI with cryptographic integrity verification for Credential branding.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
       - Logo URI with cryptographic integrity verification for Digital Credential branding.
```

>        - Visual template URI with integrity verification for Credential presentation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
       - Visual template URI with integrity verification for Digital Credential presentation.
```

AS Registration Procedure

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authentic Source Registration Procedure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

       "user_information": "Driving license data is available for licenses issued after January 1, 2020. For older licenses, contact the local transport authority office."
     },
     "data_capabilities": [
       {
         "domains": ["IDENTITY", "AUTHORIZATION"],
         "intended_purposes": ["DRIVING_LICENSE"],
         "available_claims": [
           "given_name", "family_name", "birth_date", "birth_place",
           "issue_date", "expiry_date", "document_number", "driving_privileges"
         ],
         "integration_method": "pdnd",
         "integration_endpoint": "https://api.gov.example/transport/driving-license",
         "api_specification": "https://docs.gov.example/transport/api-oas3.yaml",
         "data_provision": {
           "immediate_flow": true,
           "deferred_flow": false
         },
         "update_frequency": "real_time"
       }
     ],
     "display": {
       "background_color": "#003d82",
       "text_color": "#ffffff",
       "logo_uri": "https://www.gov.example/assets/transport-logo.svg",
       "logo_uri#integrity": "sha-256-a665a45920422f9d417e4867efdc4fb8a04a1f3fff1fa07e998e86f7f7a27ae3"

>      }

Reviewer: is that about the Organization or one or more of its data capabilities?

I mean, considering that an AS may enable a VCI to issue two or three different Credential types, how could it provide these style information or these should be considered only about its organizational visual identity?

@fmarino-ipzs ^

Author: Good catch. Probably display object should be within the array, but logo_uri and logo_uri#integrity should be placed outside the array, as they refer to the organizational visual identity. WDYT?

   }

**Step 2 - Technical Validation**: Supervisory Body validates submitted registration focusing on:

  - **Claims Registry Compliance**: Validation of claims format, identifiers, and existence in Claims Registry.
  - **Taxonomy Validation**: Verification that declared domains, and purposes are valid taxonomy entries.
  - **API Integration Verification**:

    - **Public Entities**: PDND e-service specification compliance verification
    - **Private Entities**: OpenAPI 3.0 specification completeness including authorization framework, request/response schemas, error handling mechanisms, and sandbox environment.

  - **Response Format Standards**: Verification of Claims Registry format usage and state mapping specification.

**Step 3 - AS Registry Publication**: Upon successful validation:

>   - Authentic Source Entity is published in AS Registry with complete declared capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Authentic Source Entity is published in the AS Registry with complete declared capabilities.
```

  - Authentic Source becomes discoverable by Credential Issuers for integration requests.
  - Authentic Source is ready for operational data provision.

.. note::

>    AS registration is complete and independent of CI integration. AS entities become discoverable immediately upon AS Registry publication, while Credential availability to end-users depends on administrative AS-CI authorization followed by successful technical integration and Supervisory Body policy approval for catalog eligibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Authentic Source registration is complete and independent of CI integration. AS entities become discoverable immediately upon Authentic Source Registry publication, while Credential availability to end Users depends on administrative AS-CI authorization followed by successful technical integration and Supervisory Body policy approval for catalog eligibility.
```

 AS-CI  is not a defined term nor a defined acronym. What does it mean?
 I suggest to not use acronyms in the onboardign section at all, considering the audiences of these onboarding guidelines, decisely administrative and not technical.

Author: It is fine with me, but this section was written for a technical audience, while onboarding overview was for administrative ones. Here we are describing technical procedures.

Authentic Source - Credential Issuer Integration Process
---------------------------------------------------------

Following administrative AS-CI authorization obtained during the administrative registration phase, technical integration procedures establish the operational API connections and data access mechanisms between Credential Issuers and Authentic Sources.

Technical integration encompasses:

- **API Endpoint Configuration**: Establishment of secure API connections as specified in AS technical specifications (PDND e-services for public AS, OpenAPI 3.0 implementations for private AS).
- **Claims Mapping Validation**: Verification that CI implementation correctly maps AS data responses to standardized Claims Registry identifiers.
- **Data Flow Testing**: Validation of immediate/deferred data provision capabilities and error handling mechanisms.
- **Security Implementation**: Configuration of authentication, authorization, and audit logging as required by AS security standards.

Federation Entities Onboarding Process
---------------------------------------

> Federation Entities (Credential Issuers, Relying Parties, and Wallet Providers) MUST undergo onboarding procedures to establish trust relationships within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The federation onboarding process establishes the distributed trust infrastructure through certificate issuance, trust chain validations, and compliance attestation as detailed in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Federation Entities (Credential Issuers, Relying Parties, and Wallet Providers) MUST undergo onboarding procedures to establish trust relationships within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The federation onboarding process establishes the distributed trust infrastructure through X.509 Certificate issuance, Trust Chain validations, and compliance attestation as detailed in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.
```

Hierarchical Federation Authority Model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The IT-Wallet federation implements a **hierarchical onboarding model** where Federation Entities MUST be onboarded by one of the following actors:

  1. **Trust Anchor**: The root authority that has the capability to directly onboard any Federation Entity.
  2. **Intermediates**: Delegated authorities that onboard Leaf Entities on behalf of Trust Anchor.

> This hierarchical approach enables **distributed onboarding management** while maintaining a unified trust establishment. Both Trust Anchors and Intermediates act as **Federation Authorities** with the following onboarding capabilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both Trust Anchors and Intermediates act as **Federation Authorities** with the following onboarding capabilities:
```

  - **Certificate Issuance**: Issue X.509 Certificates to their Immediate Subordinates with appropriate naming constraints as defined in :ref:`trust:X.509 PKI`.
  - **Metadata Policy Application**: Apply federation-specific metadata policies with **cascading effect** (Trust Anchor policies override Intermediate policies).

>   - **Trust Mark Issuance**: Issue Federation Trust Marks attesting Subordinate compliance with federation requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Trust Mark Issuance**: Issue Federation Trust Marks attesting Subordinate capabilities and grants, according to the trust framework.
```

Therefore, Federation Entities MAY be onboarded through different paths:

  - **Direct Trust Anchor Onboarding**: Entity directly registers with the Trust Anchor.
  - **Intermediate-mediated Onboarding**: Entity registers with an appropriate Intermediate.

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Federation Onboarding Prerequisites
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Federation Entities MUST comply with the following technical requirements before initiating the onboarding process:

  - **Key Generation**: The entities MUST generate at least two key pairs using elliptic curve cryptography as specified in :ref:`algorithms:Cryptographic Algorithms`:

    - **Federation Key Pair**: Used for signing Entity Configurations and attesting Protocol Keys.

>     - **Protocol Key Pair(s)**: Used for entity-specific protocol operations, such as Credential issuance, presentation verification, others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Protocol Key Pair(s)**: Used for entity-specific protocol operations, such as Credential issuance and Credential presentation.
```

>   - **Protocol Key Attestation**: The entities MUST create self-signed X.509 Certificates for their Protocol Keys using the Federation Private Key. These Certificates establish the authority relationship between Federation and Protocol keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Protocol Key Attestation**: The entities MUST create self-signed X.509 Certificates for their Protocol Keys using the Federation Private Key. These Certificates establish the authority relationship between Federation and application specific keys.
```
Protocol Keys is not a defined term. I will go through the document replacing it with application specific keys.

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst
.. include:: ../common/symbols.rst

Entity Onboarding
=================

> This section defines the technical specifications for entity lifecycle management in the IT-Wallet ecosystem based on the **Registry Infrastructure** defined in :ref:`registry:Registry Infrastructure`. This includes initial onboarding procedures, ongoing management operations (data updates, modifications), and federation exit processes. The lifecycle management system establishes and maintains the federated trust infrastructure and registry coordination necessary for secure Digital Credential operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section defines the technical specifications for entity lifecycle management in the IT-Wallet ecosystem based on the **Registry Infrastructure** defined in :ref:`registry:Registry Infrastructure`. This includes initial onboarding procedures, ongoing management operations, such as data updates and modifications, and federation exit processes. The lifecycle management system establishes and maintains the federated trust infrastructure and registry coordination necessary for secure Digital Credential operations.
```

For a high-level overview of the onboarding process, see :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Onboarding System`. In particular, the Section :ref:`onboarding-high-level:Onboarding Journey Maps` provides an onboarding journey map from the perspective of Entity's operators.

Overview
--------

Entity Onboarding System Architecture
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The IT-Wallet ecosystem is based on a federated trust infrastructure where participating entities MUST establish cryptographic trust relationships and maintain compliance with common security standards. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IT-Wallet ecosystem is based on a federated trust infrastructure where participating entities MUST establish trust with each other. 
```

The onboarding framework MUST allow technical registration procedures that are tailored to the participant's role in the IT-Wallet ecosystem:

  1. For Authentic Sources requiring data-focused registration procedures.
  2. For operational Entities (Credential Issuers, Relying Parties, Wallet Providers) requiring trust establishment.

Entity Types and Onboarding Pathways
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following table summarizes entity types, their roles, and corresponding onboarding pathways:

.. list-table:: Entity Types and Onboarding Pathways
   :class: longtable
   :widths: 20 30 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - **Entity Type**
     - **Primary Role**
     - **Onboarding Pathway**
     - **Key Requiring**
   * - Authentic Sources
     - Authoritative data providers for Digital Credential attributes
     - :ref:`entity-onboarding:Authentic Sources Registration Process`

>      - Data authority validation, API integration (PDND/Custom).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Data authority validation, API integration, such as PDND.
```

  - **For Intermediate onboarding**: Additional elements include the Intermediate's X.509 Certificate and the Trust Anchor's self-signed Certificate, forming a complete X.509 Certificate chain.
  - All X.509 Certificates are expressed in DER format encoded in Base64.

Example X.509 Certificate chain response:

.. code-block:: json

   [
     "MIIDqjCCA1GgAwIBAgIGAZc6/V9qMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw...",
     "MIIDQzCCAuigAwIBAgIGAZc6+XlDMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw..."
   ]

.. note::
   If validation fails, the entity receives a response with identified issues to be resolved before submitting a new onboarding request.

**Step 3 - Entity Configuration Update and Resolve Request**: After receiving the X.509 Certificate chain from the Federation Authority, the entity MUST:

  1. **Update Entity Configuration**:

    - Add an ``authority_hints`` claim with a JSON Array containing the **immediate Federation Authority's** Federation Entity Identifier (Trust Anchor for direct onboarding, or Intermediate for mediated onboarding) as defined in :ref:`trust:Federation Roles`.

>     - Update the Federation Entity Public Key in the ``jwks`` claim by adding an ``x5c`` claim with the complete X.509 Certificate chain received from the Federation Authority.

Reviewer: @fmarino-ipzs this may appear as a design error, because an entity can get onboarded by more than a single TA and therefore having multiple certificates chain belonging to multiple TA, while this approach only use a single TA and this doesn't scale

Reviewer: I suggest to not touch leave's EC but only publish issued xc within the subordinates statements, in full respect of the different authorities issuing certificates to the same entity's key

Reviewer: the attestation signed by an authority about a leaf is represented by the subordinate statement and not by EC, those x5c must be provided therefore in the subordinate statement and not in the EC

participants should not update their EC when they get an x.509 certificate from a superior entity

          "x5c": [
            "MIIDprotocolCert...",  // Protocol cert (signed by Federation key)
            "MIIDqjCCA1GgAwIBAgIGAZc6/V9qMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw...",  // Federation cert
            "MIIDQzCCAuigAwIBAgIGAZc6+XlDMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCMIGzMQsw..."   // Root cert
          ]
        }

  2. **Publish Updated Entity Configuration**: Publish the updated EC at the ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint as specified in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.

  3. **Submit Resolve Request**: Call the **Trust Anchor**'s ``/resolve`` endpoint (as defined in :ref:`trust:Trust Infrastructure Requirements`) with URL-encoded parameters:

    - ``sub``: Federation Entity Identifier.
    - ``trust_anchor``: **Trust Anchor** Federation Entity Identifier (always the root Trust Anchor, even for Intermediate-mediated onboarding).

    Example resolve request:

    .. code-block:: http

        GET /resolve?sub=https%3A%2F%2Fcredentials.example.gov&trust_anchor=https%3A%2F%2Ftrust-anchor.example.gov HTTP/1.1
        Host: trust-anchor.example.gov

**Step 4: Resolve Response and Onboarding Completion**

Following the resolve request, the **Federation Authority** performs:

>   - **Trust Chain Reconstruction**: Reconstruction of a valid Trust Chain for the entity as defined in :ref:`trust:The Infrastructure of Trust`.

Reviewer: this is not recommended, resolve endpoints should not trigger new trust chain evaluations to reduce propagation attacks.

>   - **Federation Trust Mark Generation**: Generation of an IT-Wallet Federation Trust Mark as a signed JWT attestation of the entity's federation membership and compliance with IT-Wallet technical requirements.

Reviewer: trust mark issuance must be performed using the trust mark endpoint and not the resolve endpoint.
resolve endpoint response should be cached as well.

>   - **Trust Mark Integration in Subordinate Statement**: The generated Trust Mark is included in the entity's Subordinate Statement as defined in :ref:`trust:Subordinate Statements`.

Reviewer: this is not encouraged in openid federation draft 43, since trust marks SHOULD only be provided within the ECs.

  - Transmission of an HTTP response containing the created JWT (Resolve Response).

If the response status code is ``200 OK``, the Federation Entity MUST complete the onboarding process by:

  - **Validate Resolve Response**: Validate the JWT contained in the Resolve Response and extract the Trust Chain and validated metadata from the JWT payload.
  - **Fetch Subordinate Statement**: Retrieve its own Subordinate Statement from the immediate Federation Authority using the ``/fetch`` endpoint as defined in :ref:`trust:Federation API endpoints`.
  - **Extract Trust Mark**: Extract the Federation Trust Mark from the Subordinate Statement ``trust_marks`` claim.
  - **Trust Mark Integration**: Include the extracted Trust Mark in its Entity Configuration using the ``trust_marks`` claim as specified in :ref:`trust:Entity Configuration Leaves and Intermediates`.
  - **Final Entity Configuration Update**: Publish the updated Entity Configuration with the integrated Trust Mark at the ``/.well-known/openid-federation`` endpoint.

> Upon successful completion of Step 4, the **entity onboarding is successfully completed**. The entity is now operational within the IT-Wallet federation and ready for operational activities.

Reviewer: this step must be replaced with a request to the fetch endpoint, that's enough to prove the succesful onboarding.

   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80

   * - **Claim**
     - **Description**
   * - **trust_mark_type**
     - **REQUIRED**. Identifier for the type of Trust Mark following the schema: ``https://<federation_authority_domain>/trust_marks/<purpose>/<entity_type>``.
   * - **trust_mark**
     - **REQUIRED**. A signed JSON Web Token representing the Trust Mark issued by the Federation Authority.

The Trust Mark JWT (contained in the ``trust_mark`` claim above) includes the following claims:

.. list-table:: Trust Mark JWT Claims
   :class: longtable
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80

   * - **Claim**
     - **Description**
   * - **iss**
     - **REQUIRED**. Federation Authority issuing the Trust Mark (immediate superior: Trust Anchor or Intermediate).
   * - **sub**
     - **REQUIRED**. Federation Entity Identifier of the recipient.
   * - **id**
     - **REQUIRED**. Unique Trust Mark identifier, MUST match the ``trust_mark_type`` claim.
   * - **iat**
     - **REQUIRED**. Trust Mark issuance timestamp.
   * - **exp**
     - **REQUIRED**. Trust Mark expiration timestamp.
   * - **organization_type**
     - **REQUIRED**. Entity organization type (``public`` or ``private``).

>    * - **id_code**

Reviewer: we cannot use this parameter with different values types

we can use different parameters name, like ipa_code and vat_number OR using a single generic parameter name and a namespace identiying the value type, eg `vat_number:$uid`
